content: Adding Build Environment Threats section (#1287)
slsa-framework/slsa: docs/spec/draft/attested-build-env-levels.md

### Build environment threats

SLSA [Build track] defines requirements for the provenance that is generated for the build artifacts. Trustworthiness of the build provenance largely depends on the trustworthiness of the [build environment] the build runs in. Build track assumes full trust into the [Build Platform] providing no solutions to verify integrity of the build environment. BuildEnv track intends to close this gap.

Build environment is bootstrapped from a [build image], which is expected to be an artifact of a SLSA build pipeline. Build platform verifies image provenance upon starting up the environment and provides evidence to the tenant.

> Bootrapping the build environment is a complex process, especially at higher SLSA levels. [Build L3] usually requires significant changes to existing build platforms to maintain ephemeral build environments. It is not uncommon for the build platforms to rely on public cloud providers for managing compute resources that power build environments. This in turn might significantly increase attack surface because added build platform dependencies effectively become part of the TCB.

Reviewer: Is `TCB` defined somewhere?

Reviewer: As this is the first time mentioning it (that I found), maybe spell it out first then put `TCB` in parenthesis.

Reviewer: Oh I see now that there is a link section below, `[TCB]` would then be preferred.

Author: Done. Added link to https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/trusted_computing_base

[BuildEnv L3] level protects from threats coming from the Compute Platform. It requires build running in a trusted execution environment using technologies like [AMD SEV] and [Intel TDX]. Compute platform is considered untrusted at L3 with the trust rooted into hardware.

NOTE: [Control Plane] is considered trusted at L2 and L3 as it performs remote attestation of the build environment. Build platforms MAY provide capabilities that let tenants perform remote attestation themselves. However, for the Control Plane to be considered untrusted it should have no back-door access to the build environment (e.g. via SSH). Besides, Control Plane provides input data to the build environment (i.e. build request message) and security risks associated with compromising inputs have to be considered as well.

What follows are the example threats.

#### Invalid build image

_Threat_: Wrong [build image] is used for the [build environment]. This could be a dev/test image or an older version of the image having security vulnerabilities.

_Mitigation_: [Control Plane] verifies build image provenance upon creating build environment. Needs [BuildEnv L1] level

> _Example_: Malicious actor gained access to the build image supply chain and was ultimately able to configure the wrong image in the Build platform.

Reviewer 2: For this and the other threats , I think we should flip the Mitigation and Example so the example follows the threat description.

#### Root file system integrity

_Threat_: Malicious software is deployed to the [build environment] via unauthorized access to the root file system.

_Mitigation_: Root file system is protected by file system integrity solutions like [dm-verity] and is measured in the [TPM]. Or the root file system is encrypted with the encryption key released to the build environment after it has passed remote attestation. Needs [BuildEnv L2] level.

_Example_: Malicious actor gained unauthorized access to the build environment root file system and was able to modify it. For a build image that is served remotely via a network file system or a network block device this could happen if the remote server is compromised or data was compromised at rest.

#### Reused build environment

_Threat_: [Build environment] unexpectedly reused across two or more builds

_Mitigation_: Unique build identifier is included into the Build environment provenance (and [TPM] measurement) allowing [Control plane] to detect environment reuse. Needs [BuildEnv L2] level

> _Example_: Due to a bug in the build platform, the environment was used for running two or more jobs and effectively losing “ephemeral” property. Malicious actors could use this vulnerability to poison the build environments they should not have access to.

Reviewer 2: > This scenario appears to introduce a requirement that a control plane component (presumably in a higher privileged level than the build itself) is expected to compute a build identifier and measure it into a PCR... For example, if the TEE provides an instance identifier, you could use that. 

Yes, this needs to be clarified in this text. The actual [BuildEnv L2](https://slsa.dev/spec/draft/attested-build-env-levels#buildenv-l2-attested-build-environment-instantiation) requirements, as currently defined, actually do specify that it's the environment running with a TPM/in a TEE that is supposed to measure the instance ID into the PCR (or similar), not the control plane.

>While possible, this doesn't sound like the only (or even the most feasible) way to prevent environment reuse.

I think we actually need to clarify what we mean by "environment reuse." What we really mean is environment _instance_ reuse, in line with the non-interference requirements of Build L3, which seek to ensure that the same VM instance isn't reused by another tenant as a means to leak info about or influence another build. Perhaps we even need to make this distinction clearer in the Build track.

> it's perfectly fine to have multiple builds reuse the same build "environment" as long as the "environment" is pristine, that is, the runtime measurements match the boot time measurements.

This assumption is actually already built into the BuildEnv track. It's ok (and in fact, expected) to reuse the same "base" environment (i.e., base VM image, host machine). But what's maybe missing here is that we distinguish between the pre-build (running) environment and the actual "build at runtime". In the former, the CI platform has not handed off control of the build environment to the tenant, in the latter the tenant is executing their build and can essentially do whatever they want in the running VM. Because the instance ID is assigned _before_ the tenant gets the environment, we treat it as pre-build property. Does this make sense?

> #### Continuous integrity of the build environment

Reviewer 2: Two things: 1) "Continuous integrity" isn't really a threat, so we probably want to replace this with something like "runtime host system compromise". 
2) I think we need to define the scope of "integrity of the build environment" at L3 because hardware TPMs + Linux IMA can also be used to provide continuous integrity checking, but of the file system only, whereas TEEs can extend this to the memory.

Author: I removed this threat as this topic require more thinking...

_Threat_: [Build environment] integrity was compromised due to unauthorized access on the [Compute platform] provider side.

_Mitigation_: Trusted execution environment provided by hardware-assisted mechanisms like [AMD SEV] and [Intel TDX] secures access to the build environment state even in the event of a fully compromised compute provider. Requires [BuildEnv L3] level.

> _Example_: Malicious actor (potentially a rogue administrator) was able to retrieve encryption secrets from the build environment memory and modify contents of the root or temporary file system (used to store transient data including build artifacts).

Reviewer 2: @bureado The example scenarios you provide are actually spot-on, we should add them to this section. Thank you!

I definitely agree, it's tricky to actually rely on IMA-like mechanisms to check "runtime integrity" for complex build environments (which most of them are). Even though there do exist HW TEEs that could support IMA (TDX comes to mind, there may be others), the non-determinism of the system still poses a challenge. This is the main reason why we've so far excluded runtime integrity from the BuildEnv track, and I still think we should. Now, if the build environment's FS, for example, was partitioned into read-only and RW segments or something like this, we could start considering an additional "runtime integrity" level in this track.

The other reason I think HW TEEs could be valuable for "integrity at runtime" is also their ability to detect modifications to CPU states and the TEE memory in use, in addition to their confidentiality properties. But at L3, I still think this particular property is nice-to-have.

> _Example_: Malicious actor (potentially a rogue administrator) was able to retrieve encryption secrets from the build environment memory and modify contents of the root or temporary file system (used to store transient data including build artifacts).

Author: > when I think of "runtime integrity" I'm thinking (...) IMA.

We can split vulnerabilities/threats for the build environment integrity into two buckets:
- "outside threats" - those that come from the compute platform that hosts the environment
- "inside threats" - those that come from the software running inside the build environment

This section (and I would say the whole Build environment track!) is scoped to the _outside threats_. Everything that happens inside the Build environment is considered "trusted" (for the scope of this track) and is passed on to the Build track (or a new future track).

Speaking about IMA it brings an interesting topic of dependencies across the tracks. Non-determinism of the builds could be addressed by the IMA policies tuned for the specific builds. In this model tenant (who schedules a build) is also a Build Image provider. By knowing all the details about the build process tenant may define strict IMA policies regarding what is allowed during the build process. These policies are passed to the Control Plane that attests Build Environment at the end of the build when it is requested to sign the build provenance.

The challenge with this model though is how much sense those polices make to the consumer of build artifacts? Obviously we can include those policies into the Build Environment provenance and we could also include the whole IMA log their too. That could be a lot of data with a low signal/noise ratio but that might be a common problem for all sorts of provenance.

### Build environment threats

> SLSA [Build track] defines requirements for the provenance that is generated for the build artifacts. Trustworthiness of the build provenance largely depends on the trustworthiness of the [build environment] the build runs in. Build track assumes full trust into the [Build Platform] providing no solutions to verify integrity of the build environment. BuildEnv track intends to close this gap.

Author: Will do. Thanks for explaining the sentence per line formatting. I was not aware about it.

> Build environment is bootstrapped from a [build image], which is expected to be an artifact of a SLSA build pipeline. Build platform verifies image provenance upon starting up the environment and provides evidence to the tenant.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, we should lay out the benefits of providing evidence for security properties that are in place. We should also note that what is meant here is actually SLSA Provenance specifically, and that at higher levels of the track several other security properties are checked.

> Build environment is bootstrapped from a [build image], which is expected to be an artifact of a SLSA build pipeline. Build platform verifies image provenance upon starting up the environment and provides evidence to the tenant.

Author: >  image security properties including provenance

What would be the reasoning for having image security properties that are not part of the provenance? Are they being passed on the side in addition to the provenance?

I can imagine that _environment_ has additional security properties beyond those that come with the provenance from the build image provider and so when build platform attests build environment it considers a combination of both. Is it what you had in mind?

> Build environment is bootstrapped from a [build image], which is expected to be an artifact of a SLSA build pipeline. Build platform verifies image provenance upon starting up the environment and provides evidence to the tenant.

Reviewer 3: Provenance says nothing about quality assurance endorsements for example.

> Bootstrapping the build environment is a complex process, especially at higher SLSA levels. [Build L3] usually requires significant changes to existing build platforms to maintain ephemeral build environments. It is not uncommon for the build platforms to rely on public cloud providers for managing compute resources that power build environments. This in turn might significantly increase attack surface because added build platform dependencies effectively become part of the [TCB].

Author: > why and how the attack surface is altered in a public cloud setting

It mostly comes from the shire size and obscurity of cloud providers. When Build Platform uses specific feature of a cloud provider (e.g. virtual machine IaaS) there is no way to trust a specific part of a cloud provider infra because internal interactions are hidden from the consumer. Disks for those VMs probably come from a blob storage over a network. All of that is managed by its own control plane which uses some kind of IAM to access it. It snowballs pretty fast. Ultimately tenants have to trust the whole cloud provider which is huge.

> Bootstrapping the build environment is a complex process, especially at higher SLSA levels. [Build L3] usually requires significant changes to existing build platforms to maintain ephemeral build environments. It is not uncommon for the build platforms to rely on public cloud providers for managing compute resources that power build environments. This in turn might significantly increase attack surface because added build platform dependencies effectively become part of the [TCB].

Author: I think it's both. It definitely alters attack surface due to the shared responsibility model. But what I wanted to emphasize here is that it _expands_ attack surface because cloud providers are massive companies with complex infrastructure that provide limited (if any) abilities to scope the context of the trust and continuously validate it over time when using their services.

If I have a box under my desk I might not be good with installing all the security updates onto it but my hardware setup is minimalistic and transparent (to me). If I move this box into the cloud then it will be patched on time but on the downside there is a massive amount of complex hardware and software and people that make it possible to run my single VM (and myriad of other things). And even if I had a complete visibility into their infrastructure (which I have not) I won't be able to wrap my head around their security posture. And no single person would probably be able to.

Perhaps what I need to add here is literally this?
```
Cloud providers are massive companies with complex infrastructure that provide limited (if any) abilities to scope the context of the trust and continuously validate it over time when using their services.
```

BuildEnv track addresses TCB size concerns at [BuildEnv L2] and [BuildEnv L3] levels. [BuildEnv L1] level assumes full trust into the Build Platform including underlying [Compute Platform] (eg. public cloud provider). BuildEnv L2 level adds capabilities for verifying Compute Platform. BuildEnv L3 level removes Compute Platform from TCB rooting the trust into the hardware.

> This diagram outlines the lifetime of a build image between it being generated and used for creating a build environment. Build Image could be compromised at different times (components). Higher SLSA levels secure the build environment from a larger amount of threats.

Author: I meant to say that there is an inherent lifetime of an image between generating it and creating a build environment with it. And along this time line image is being passed across different parties and so there is both time and space scale at play. I will refine wording

<div class="mermaid">
flowchart LR    
      BuildImage>Build Image] ---> |L1|BuildPlatform[[Build Platform]]
      BuildPlatform[[Build Platform]] ---> |L2|ComputeProvider[[Compute Provider]]
      ComputeProvider[[Compute Provider]] ---> |L3|BuildEnvironment[(Build Environment)]
</div>

> [BuildEnv L1] protects from threats that happened to the build image in between generating it and passing to the Build Platform. This covers cases of unauthorized modifications happening to the image as it is distributed (potentially via untrusted channels).

Reviewer 2: I'd replace "transmission" with "distribution" since that's the term we use throughout the spec more commonly.

> [BuildEnv L2] level protects from threats occurring at the Build Platform side as it interacts with the Compute Platform for actually creating a build environment. [Control plane] is the only Build Platform component that is considered trusted at L2 as it performs remote attestation of the build environment.

Author: @deeglaze An example threat could be a bad actor gaining admin access to the Build platform. Then they can do various things ranging from bootstrapping a different image (from what tenant expects) to installing additional components into the environments before handing it over to the tenant for the CI job execution.

> [BuildEnv L3] level protects from threats coming from the Compute Platform. It requires build running in a trusted execution environment using technologies like [AMD SEV] and [Intel TDX]. Compute platform is considered untrusted at L3 with the trust rooted into hardware.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[BuildEnv L3] protects from threats coming from the Compute Platform.
It requires build running in a trusted execution environment using technologies like [AMD SEV] and [Intel TDX].
The compute platform (i.e., privileged remote operators and host system software) is considered semi-trusted at L3.
Side channels can still be utilized to extract information when analyzing information like memory access patterns, and these cannot be ruled out without further integrity protections and assurances on the system software and human access controls.
The [SEV-SNP/TDX threat model](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/security/snp-tdx-threat-model.rst) describes this level of trust reduction through the use of memory encryption, integrity protection, and remote attestation with cryptographic keys that are certified by the hardware manufacturer.
TEE technologies are not infallible, so physical human access to hardware is still a risk that is accepted at L3.
```
AMD SEV does not have a particularly compelling integrity story. It does not remove trust from the hypervisor the way SEV-SNP and TDX do. Do you mean SEV-SNP?

I don't think we can say L3 makes the host completely untrusted either.

Author: Yes, I used AMD SEV as an umbrella acronym for all generations including SEV-SNP. The link brings to the AMD page that covers them all but I can update it for better visibility

Author: > The compute platform (i.e., privileged remote operators and host system software) is considered semi-trusted

@deeglaze How can we be more specific here? CoCo claims to isolate VM from the host interface and "semi-trusted" wording may not be inspiring enough for the people to invest into L3. I am OK with trusting physical access but trusting remote access may contradict CoCo claims. Would it be accurate to say that we need to trust remote privileged operator to the extent of that operator being able to perform side channel attacks to compromise TEE? Or there is more to that?

Reviewer 3: It's not just side channels that are a problem if you're running a typical guest stack, since there are still virtual firmwares and device drivers that aren't fully hardened to not trust the VMM. I don't think there are many guest environments that have both reached that level of hardening and also have a rich enough environment to run a full build service.

> NOTE: [Control Plane] is considered trusted at L2 and L3 as it performs remote attestation of the build environment. Build platforms MAY provide capabilities that let tenants perform remote attestation themselves. However, for the Control Plane to be considered untrusted it should have no back-door access to the build environment (e.g. via SSH). Besides, Control Plane provides input data to the build environment (i.e. build request message) and security risks associated with compromising inputs have to be considered as well.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NOTE: [Control Plane] is considered trusted at L2 and L3 because it _verifies_ the remote attestation of the build environment.
Build platforms MAY provide capabilities that let tenants perform remote attestation themselves.
However, for the Control Plane to be considered untrusted it should have no back-door access to the build environment (e.g. via SSH).
Besides, Control Plane provides input data to the build environment (i.e., build request message) and security risks associated with compromising inputs have to be considered as well.
```
I'm not very convinced by this. It seems to assume a particular build platform architecture I'm not familiar with.

Author: @deeglaze which part exactly? Control plane attesting build environment?

We had discussions about explicitly defining attestation service that could be external to the build platform (and which obviously has to be trusted). If we do it then the only other piece that we need to consider are the interfaces between the Control Plane and the Build Environment (i.e. inputs for the Build process).

Would it make things clearer here if we decoupled attestation service from the control plane?

Reviewer 3: I think that yes the two aspects should be decoupled. There's some actor that will verify the remote attestation of the build environment to establish the L3 claim of the build environment. That actor need not be part of the build process. That L3 quality could be assigned well after build by a relying party that is checking the attestation measurements after the fact. Operationally that's a rather expensive choice to make, but there are certainly folks that want to have the opportunity to check these qualities themselves without an architecture that hides raw measurements.

[BuildEnv L1] protects from threats that happened to the build image in between its creation and distribution to the Build Platform. 
This covers the case of unauthorized modifications to the image as it is distributed (potentially via untrusted channels).

[BuildEnv L2] delivers boot time integrity providing cryptographic evidence that the build environment has been bootstrapped to an expected state.  
The Compute platform is fully trusted at this level as it provides a virtual TPM device that performs boot measurements. 
[Control plane] is the only Build Platform component that is considered trusted at L2 as it performs remote attestation of the build environment.

[BuildEnv L3] protects from threats coming from the Compute Platform by adopting hardware root of trust.
Boot time integrity is verifiable using the cryptographic evidences signed by a key unique to each hardware device (e.g., CPU chip). 

> Practically, achieving L3 requires Compute Providers supporting remote attestation of the hypervisor stack or having the build running in a trusted execution environment using technologies like [AMD SEV-SNP] and [Intel TDX] without dependence on a host-provided virtual TPM device. 

Author: > Who is the remote party that seeks to attest the hypervisor stack

@marcelamelara that would be Control Plane. Next paragraph mentions that `Control Plane is considered trusted at L2 and L3 because it _verifies_ the remote attestation of the build environment`

[BuildEnv L1] protects from threats that happened to the build image in between its creation and distribution to the Build Platform. 
This covers the case of unauthorized modifications to the image as it is distributed (potentially via untrusted channels).

[BuildEnv L2] delivers boot time integrity providing cryptographic evidence that the build environment has been bootstraped to an expected state.  
The Compute platform is fully trusted at this level as it provides virtual firmware (i.e. vTPM) that performs boot measurements. 
[Control plane] is the only Build Platform component that is considered trusted at L2 as it performs remote attestation of the build environment.

[BuildEnv L3] protects from threats coming from the Compute Platform by adopting hardware root of trust.

> Boot time integrity is verifiable using the cryptographic evidences signed by a key unique to each hardware device (i.e. CPU chip). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Boot time integrity is verifiable using the cryptographic evidences signed by a key unique to each hardware device (e.g., CPU chip). 
```

> Practically, achieving L3 might require build running in a trusted execution environment using technologies like [AMD SEV-SNP] and [Intel TDX]. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Practically, achieving L3 might require build running in a trusted execution environment using technologies like [AMD SEV-SNP] and [Intel TDX] without dependence on a host-provided virtual TPM device.
```

Reviewer 2: Yes, and we should clarify that the VM secure boot requirements from L2 remain nonetheless.
